Freeze 7 (#225)
broadinstitute/ukbb_qc: ukbb_qc/release/data_dict_summaries.md

This hybrid ancestry label was used in sample QC to detect outlier samples. However, we switched to using each sample's ancestry label from the Pan-UK Biobank project (https://pan.ukbb.broadinstitute.org/) to calculate genotype callstats for maximum compatibility with downstream analyses that used the Pan-UK Biobank labels.

### Outlier detection
We flagged any sample falling outside <b>4</b> median absolute deviations (MAD) from the median of any of the following metrics (stratified by hybrid ancestry label and tranche as a proxy for platform):
- Number of deletions
- Number of insertions
- Number of SNVs
- Insertion : deletion ratio
- Transition : transversion (TiTv) ratio
- Heterozygous : homozygous ratio

> Note that a sample's tranche refers to the data freeze when a sample was released: 150K (inital 50K public release), 100K, 200K, 300K, or 455K.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that a sample's tranche refers to the data freeze when a sample was released: 150K (the initial 50K exome public release), 100K, 200K, 300K, or 455K.
```

### Hard filters
The hard filters applied to the raw data and used in downstream QC were: sex imputation filters, low callrate, and low coverage:
- Sex imputation filters (filtered all karyotypes except XX and XY):
- Low callrate (cutoff <b>0.99</b>)
- Low mean coverage (cutoff <b>20X</b>)
We excluded these hard-filtered samples from subsequent sample QC analyses (platform PCA, relatedness inference, ancestry imputation, and outlier detection) so that these low quality samples would not influence our downstream results.

### Relatedness inference
We used the `pc_relate` method in Hail to infer relatedness on variants that are <b>autosomal, bi-allelic single nucleotide variants (SNVs), common (allele frequency > 0.1%), high call rate (> 99%), and LD-pruned with a cutoff of r2 = 0.1</b>. We then used the `maximal_independent_set` method in Hail to get the largest set of samples with no pair of samples related at the 2nd degree or closer, prioritizing samples with greater mean depth. The related samples that are not in the maximal independent set are flagged as related.

### Ancestry inference

> We used a hybrid method to infer ancestry. We projected the UK Biobank data onto the gnomAD population principal components (PCs) and then used a random forest classifier trained on gnomAD ancestry labels to assign ancestry to the UK Biobank samples. We observed that many samples being labeled as African using this method were being flagged as outliers by our population stratified outlier detection method. This seemed to be due to the fact that there is a cluster of samples being labeled as African that look highly admixed. To account for this, we ran a principal component analysis (PCA) on the UK Biobank samples and applied a clustering method (HDBSCAN). We found that this clustering method split the African labeled samples into unique clusters and reduced the number of samples flagged as outliers while recapturing most of the same global population clusters observed in gnomAD. As a result, we chose to assign ancestry using a hybrid of the projection onto gnomAD PCs and the UK Biobank specific PCA clustering: for any sample that was assigned to a cluster using the UK Biobank-specific PCA, the sample was given that cluster as their ancestry assignment in order to preserve the sub-structure observed using the clustering approach. Any sample that was not assigned to a cluster was given the label from the initial (gnomAD) PCA projection and random forest classification.

Author: I just remembered, we used the gnomAD RF classifier rather than building our own UKBB classifier, I will also update that

> We used a hybrid method to infer ancestry. We projected the UK Biobank data onto the gnomAD population principal components (PCs) and then used a random forest classifier trained on gnomAD ancestry labels to assign ancestry to the UK Biobank samples. We observed that many samples being labeled as African using this method were being flagged as outliers by our population stratified outlier detection method. This seemed to be due to the fact that there is a cluster of samples being labeled as African that look highly admixed. To account for this, we ran a principal component analysis (PCA) on the UK Biobank samples and applied a clustering method (HDBSCAN). We found that this clustering method split the African labeled samples into unique clusters and reduced the number of samples flagged as outliers while recapturing most of the same global population clusters observed in gnomAD. As a result, we chose to assign ancestry using a hybrid of the projection onto gnomAD PCs and the UK Biobank specific PCA clustering: for any sample that was assigned to a cluster using the UK Biobank-specific PCA, the sample was given that cluster as their ancestry assignment in order to preserve the sub-structure observed using the clustering approach. Any sample that was not assigned to a cluster was given the label from the initial (gnomAD) PCA projection and random forest classification.

Reviewer: great, looks good, thank you for adding

This hybrid ancestry label was used in sample QC to detect outlier samples. However, we switched to using each sample's ancestry label from the Pan-UK Biobank project (https://pan.ukbb.broadinstitute.org/) to calculate genotype callstats for maximum compatibility with downstream analyses that used the Pan-UK Biobank labels.

### Outlier detection
We flagged any sample falling outside <b>4</b> median absolute deviations (MAD) from the median of any of the following metrics (stratified by hybrid ancestry label and tranche as a proxy for platform):
- Number of deletions
- Number of insertions
- Number of SNVs
- Insertion : deletion ratio
- Transition : transversion (TiTv) ratio
- Heterozygous : homozygous ratio

> Note that a sample's tranche refers to the data freeze when a sample was released: 150K, 100K, 200K, 300K, or 455K.

Author: we've gone back and forth about this point I think -- it's not intuitive, but 150K is first because it actually refers to the 50K

> Note that a sample's tranche refers to the data freeze when a sample was released: 150K, 100K, 200K, 300K, or 455K.

Reviewer: Yeah, I know, I just really don't like it being out of order in test. Maybe keep as is, but add that 150K actually only refers to the initial 50K public release?

- Quality by depth: Sum of the non-reference genotype likelihoods divided by the sum of the depth in all carriers of that allele
- Read position RankSum: Rank Sum Test for relative positioning of reference versus alternate alleles within reads
- Mapping quality RankSum: Rank Sum Test for mapping qualities of reference versus alternate reads
- Strand bias odds ratio: Symmetric Odds Ratio test of 2x2 contingency table to detect strand bias
- Max probability of allele balance: Highest p-value for sampling the observed allele balance under a binomial model with p=0.5 (maximum across heterozygotes)

### Random forest filtering threshold
In order to set a threshold for the variants that PASS the RF filter, we looked at a few metrics:
- Number of de novo mutations in the 672 trios
- Sensitivity to ClinVar variants
- Precision recall curves in two truth samples present in our data: NA12878 and a pseudo-diploid sample (syndip; https://www.nature.com/articles/s41592-018-0054-7?WT.feed_name=subjects_standards;%20https://github.com/lh3/CHM-eval). Note: syndip was sequenced at Broad, not with the UK Biobank cohort.

> - Comparison to variant QC using previous data tranche containing 300,000 exomes

Author: works for me, removed it
